Summary of mf2005-GWM



ABSTRACT

MF2005-GWM is a Ground-Water Management Process for the U.S. Geological Survey 
modular three-dimensional ground-water model, MODFLOW-2005. MF2005-GWM uses a 
response-matrix approach to solve several types of linear, nonlinear, and 
mixed-binary linear groundwater management formulations. Each management 
formulation consists of a set of decision variables, an objective function, and 
a set of constraints. Three types of decision variables are supported by 
MF2005-GWM: flow-rate decision variables, which are withdrawal or injection 
rates at well sites; external decision variables, which are sources or sinks of 
water that are external to the flow model and do not directly affect the state 
variables of the simulated groundwater system (heads, streamflows, and so 
forth); and binary variables, which have values of 0 or 1 and are used to define 
the status of flow-rate or external decision variables. Flow-rate decision 
variables can represent wells that extend over one or more model cells and be 
active during one or more model stress periods; external variables also can be 
active during one or more stress periods. A single objective function is 
supported by MF2005-GWM, which can be specified to either minimize or maximize 
the weighted sum of the three types of decision variables. Four types of 
constraints can be specified in a MF2005-GWM formulation: upper and lower bounds 
on the flow-rate and external decision variables; linear summations of the three 
types of decision variables; hydraulic-head based constraints, including 
drawdowns, head differences, and head gradients; and streamflow and 
streamflow-depletion constraints. 

The Response Matrix Solution (RMS) Package of MF2005-GWM uses the Ground-Water 
Flow Process of MODFLOW to calculate the change in head at each constraint 
location that results from a perturbation of a flow-rate variable; these changes 
are used to calculate the response coefficients. For linear management 
formulations, the resulting matrix of response coefficients is then combined 
with other components of the linear management formulation to form a complete 
linear formulation; the formulation is then solved by use of the simplex 
algorithm, which is incorporated into the RMS Package. Nonlinear formulations 
arise for simulated conditions that include water-table (unconfined) aquifers or 
head-dependent boundary conditions (such as streams, drains, or 
evapotranspiration from the water table). Nonlinear formulations are solved by 
sequential linear programming; that is, repeated linearization of the nonlinear 
features of the management problem. In this approach, response coefficients are 
recalculated for each iteration of the solution process. Mixed-binary linear (or 
mildly nonlinear) formulations are solved by use of the branch and bound 
algorithm, which is also incorporated into the RMS Package.


HISTORY

Version 1.1 2009/06 – Reconstructed from MODFLOW-2005 Version 1.6.02. Added
capability for placement of streamflow constraints when SFR package is used. Bug fix 
that caused code failure when equality summation constraints were imposed on binary 
variables. Bug fix to correct output for SLP runs. See ‘release.txt’ for more details.


Version 1.0.1 2008/08 - Reconstructed from MODFLOW-2005 Version 1.5.00. Bug fix 
that prevented use of LPF or HUF packages. Change to output to GWMWFILE so that 
well information is printed even when stress is zero. New feature to allow 
formatted output of response matrix under NS option. See 'release.txt' for 
details. 

Version 1.0.0 2007/07/12 - Initial release, built from MODFLOW-2005 Version 
1.3.01 and MF2K-GWM Version 1.1.1 


PROCESSES

This version of MF2005-GWM includes the following processes: 

GWF2 -- Ground-Water Flow Process 
GWM1 -- Ground-Water Management Process 
OBS2 -- Observation Process 


PACKAGES

In addition to all of the packages included with Version 1.6.02 of MODFLOW-2005, 
this version of MF2005-GWM includes the following packages: 

DCV2 -- Decision Variable Package 
OBJ2 -- Objective Function Package 
HDC2 -- Head Constraints Package 
STC2 -- StreamFlow Constraints Package 
SMC2 -- Summation Constraints Package 
DCC2 -- Decision-Variable Constraints Package 
RMS2 -- Response Matrix Solution Package 
BAS2-GWM -- Basic Package for GWM 



DOCUMENTATION

See MF2005_GWM page. 
